---
title: "4361 - Morning At The Coast III"
url: /2018/09/4361-morning-at-the-coast-iii.html
publishDate: 2018-09-27 18:00:00
date: 2018-09-27
categories: 
  - "olympus-tg-5"
tags: 
  - "landscape"
  - "sea"
  - "rab"
  - "croatia"
  - "olympus-tg-5"
---
<div class="container">
<div class="center"><a target="_blank" href="https://d25zfm9zpd7gm5.cloudfront.net/1200x1200/2017/20170720_090231_lr.jpg"><img class="webfeedsFeaturedVisual" src="https://d25zfm9zpd7gm5.cloudfront.net/0600x0600/2017/20170720_090231_lr.jpg" /></a></div>
</div>
<br />

Beautiful, isn't it? And still it is the same water that people
drown in when they try to cross the Mediterranean.

We experience a scary wave of right-wing nationalism here in Europe.
The reason is, that people react to migration with fear, and that
the reaction to fear is a very primordial function of the brain.
Evolutionary that has always been a great thing. Until it stopped
being so.

Our reaction to fear is hard-wired deep in the oldest parts of our
brains. It is either fight or flee. This reaction always wins over
rational analysis. Evolutionary this was a necessity. When the lion
attacks, you have no time to discuss it, you have no time to develop
complicated strategies. You're either up in the tree or you're food.

Unfortunately this is not the way things work today.

We live in an almost infinitely complex world. We depend on food and
medication, that are produced by machines depending on energy,
depending on power lines and power stations, depending on an
industrial capacity to mine copper, to refine it and to form it into
wires, depending on a transport system that ships ore to where it is
processed, cables to where they are spanned, machines to the
factories that use them, products to consumers. We rely on an
economic system that incentivizes otherwise unrelated people to work
together and keep all that running.

Have you ever thought about what would happen if we had a major war
and lost electric current for years?

Well, you would lose access to Wikipedia, to the whole knowledge
collection that is the Internet. You would lose access to all your
e-books, your Spotify account and its music, Youtube, all of your
photographs (assuming that any paper pictures burned away with the
rest of your house), everything you had ever written on a computer
(when was the last time you have not?), in other words: most of your
memories, most of your knowledge.

So would everybody else.

Sure, we've all been to school, and I can remember that wonderful
moment in math when our teacher showed us how to derive Einstein's
solution to special relativity. I sat there at the tender age of 18,
sat in a math class and I understood Einstein. I could solve systems
of differential equations. The mind! That's where knowledge is,
right?

Wrong. I can't do any of these things any more. What my education
has left me with, that's a general idea of how these things work. If
I need them (I never do :smiley:), I can always google them or look
them up in Wikipedia.

No, we can't allow our civilization to slip away. As a species we
are programmed for war and as a complex interdependent system we are
damned to peace. It's really complicated and almost every solution
for almost every problem today requires cool, rational thinking and
a deep understanding of a tangle of relations that's too big to fit
in anybody's mind.

Instead we make gut decisions and lie to ourselves when our
"solutions" turn out to be inadequate.

I read an [article at the
Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2018/sep/21/hurricane-florence-flooding-north-carolina)
today. It was about hog farms flooded by hurricane Florence, and
about the broken dams of some of the lagoons holding excrement.

> Yet the North Carolina Pork Council argues that activists overstate damage in order to cause alarm. “While we are dismayed by the release of some liquids from some lagoons, we also understand that what has been released from the farms is the result of a once-in-a-lifetime storm and that the contents are highly diluted with rainwater,” the council stated on its website.

Once-in-a-lifetime? Really? I'd be inclined to bet against it
:stuck_out_tongue:

But that's the problem. Fear, flight and denial. May the problem go
away!

And that's also how politics work today. Populism fosters fear to
control the masses and let them decide against their best interest.
That's how fascism worked, and although the method has occasionally
been applied by the left as well, the right has developed it to
absolute mastery, while people like Steve Bannon do their best to
spread its use.