---
title: "6481 - Sarnthein VII"
url: /2024/07/6481-sarnthein-vii.html
publishDate: 2024-07-19 18:00:00
date: 2024-07-19
categories:
- "olympus-m-zuiko-digital-ed-12-100mm-f4-0-is-pro"
tags:
- "Italy"
- "south-tyrol"
- "olympus-om-d-e-m1-mk-iii"
- "camera-gear"
---
<div class="container">
<div class="center"><a target="_blank" href="https://d25zfm9zpd7gm5.cloudfront.net/1200x1200/2020/20200906_090721_lr.jpg"><img class="webfeedsFeaturedVisual" src="https://d25zfm9zpd7gm5.cloudfront.net/0600x0600/2020/20200906_090721_lr.jpg" /></a></div>
</div>
<br />

Let's have a long view in color. I really love this Olympus
12-100/4 lens. It's the one ideal travel lens. This one and
the 7-14/2.8, that has been my travel kit for years now.

## Shall I switch systems?

OM-Systems basically is selling Olympus' remainder of stock.
I doubt, that we'll ever see a Pen F mkII or an OM-1 iii. I
recently saw [a video claiming impressive improvements in
the OM-1 ii](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tIAPlvCd2Zg),
given that your niche is birding. I fully believe that, but
it's not what I do.

## Requirements

I need a lightweight camera (practically available for all
systems, even "full-frame"), lightweight lenses of highest
quality wide open, excellent in-body stabilization,
sufficient High-ISO performance, and I want to be not cut
off from progress in sensor development.

Micro Four Thirds is perfect in all but the last regard. Its
future is uncertain. What options do I have?

## Panasonic Micro Four Thirds

Panasonic still produces MFT cameras, and with the G9 ii
they are at 25 megapixels (small progress, but in line with
all those 24 megapixel cameras for APS-C or FF),
stabilization is ok, the viewfinder is not up to the OM-1's
standard, and it is much better in video. Which I don't
need. The big drawback is, that Olympus and Panasonic
stupidly didn't cooperate on tandem stabilization between
body and lenses. Therefore, my 12-100/4 would not be able to
contribute to what the Panasonic body does. The same applies
to Panasonic's dedicated aperture rings, Olympus does not
support them.

## A different system?

If I think about it, what I really want is a lightweight
lens with 16-133/4 for APS-C (assuming 1.5, not Canon's 1.6
conversion factor) or a 24-200/4 for full frame. Of course,
those lenses don't exist.

Yes, I know, FF guys say my 12-100/4 is equivalent to
24-200/8, and while this is true in terms of "apparent DOF
after cropping", it's totally wrong in terms of light, and
how that relates to shutter speed. In terms of light, my f4
is as good as everybody else's, regardless of sensor size.

In lower light, the wider aperture keeps shutter-speed
higher, or ISO lower. When I still can just use the base ISO
of 200 with given shutter speed, a "full-frame" camera with
an "equivalent" 24-200/8 would already be at ISO 800. If
such a lens did exist.

And there's more. The 12-100/4 is of the highest quality,
already showing maximum sharpness across the frame, wide
open, and across the whole zoom range. It's a pro lens.

What you get in other systems as "travel lenses", is
definitely not up to this standard.

## Requirements refined

Just for reference, let's look at weight. My 12-100/4 has
561g. That's already heavy, but for a stabilized,
weather-sealed f4 lens with a travel range, this is
outstanding. I combine it with the 7-14/2.8, coming in at
another 534g. Add the OM-1 with 599g, battery and cards
included. Add a spare battery and a light bag. Now you are
at 2kg, maybe 2.1kg, depending on the bag and your preferred
camera strip.

2kg, that's the benchmark. At that weight, I want to cover a
"full-frame" equivalent of 24-200mm with high-quality lenses
and a sufficiently sophisticated camera. 5-axis in-body
stabilization is a must for what I do, and weather-sealing
has turned out to be very convenient.

Let's start with the lenses and APS-C. Almost everything
begins at 18mm, that's 28 for Canon, 27 for everybody else. 

One option is going for three lenses. This would mean a zoom
starting below 10mm, but there is none on the market,
regardless of quality or light gathering capacity. Ok, let's
start at 15mm eq.

## Not Canon APS-C

I've never used Canon, 1.6 is a weird conversion factor, and
a 10mm Canon would need further concessions on the wide end.
Wide is even more important to me than long. Canon APS-C is
out.

## Nikon APS-C?

Nikon doesn't have a Z-Mount wide-angle zoom starting a
10mm. 

There are two Laowa, but they are both manual focus. Still,
manual focus is pretty acceptable in wide-angle. 

The Laowa 10-18/4.5-5.6 for Nikon Z weighs 520g. On the
other hand, it's a full-frame lens. Reviews are mixed,
mostly because of lacking corner sharpness, which wouldn't
be much of a problem on APS-C.

The Laowa 8-16mm 3.5-5.0 Zoom CF is APS-C, 463g, but corner
sharpness at the wide end is not great. 

Sigma doesn't produce for Z mount yet. It would have to be
one of the two Laowas.

Do we have a Nikon Z body with APS-C? Yes, but all of them
have 20 megapixels. That's surprising. The Z30 is
lightweight (405g, batteries included), but it's entry-level
and does not have a viewfinder. Nope.

The Z50 is from 2019, weighs 450g with batteries, and has a
mediocre viewfinder.

Then there is the Zfc. Looks nicely vintage, same weight as
the Z50, same viewfinder, and the "silver" version is
painted plastic, as far as I can tell.

It looks like the Z fc does not have custom modes, but the Z
50 has two of them, U1 and U2. I am used to C1-C4 on the
OM-1, and actually I use only two of them, one for
high-speed exposure bracketing, and one for focus-following.
I could live with only one for exposure bracketing, so the
Z50 is still in the game, the Zfc is not.

What do we have now? In terms of weight, we are at about
1kg. If we can get a decent 18-130+ with a maximum weight of
600g, we might be at something.

There's a single choice for Z mount, the fairly recent Nikon
18-140/3.5-6.3 VR weighing 315g. Wow! Ok, that's the range,
two lenses, what about quality?

Well, it's "surprisingly good", the three reviews I've seen
recommend it highly, but ... optically it is not in the Oly's
class in terms of sharpness across field and focal lengths.

Overall, Nikon APS-C is not very attractive, not at least
because of Nikon's traditional neglect of the format.

## Fuji

Let's have a look a Fuji. Let's start with the ultra-wide.
Fujinon XF 8-16mm 2.8 R LM WR, that's 805g, but with 12-36mm
eq, it is wider than my 7-14/2.8, as well as longer. It's an
expensive and heavy beast of a lens. At slightly more than
half the price and half the weight (385g), we have the
Fujinon XF 10-24mm 4.0 R OIS WR. "WR" stands for "Weather
Resitance", and that's also fine. "OIS" is "Optical Image
Stabilization". Furthermore, there is the Sigma Contemporary
10-18mm 2.8 DC DN, weighing only 260g!

Let's say we take the 10-24. Can we combine it with a
~24-140? There is a Fujinon XF 18-135mm 3.5-5.6 R LM OIS WR
that fits the bill. 490g. Performance is maybe about the
same as the Nikon 18-140, maybe better, seemingly lower than
that of the Olympus.

I would consider two bodies, the 26 megapixel X-T4, 607g
with batteries, and the 40 megapixel X-H2 with 660g,
batteries included. Hmm ... higher resolution, better
viewfinder, nope, the X-H2 it is.

Compromising on the long end opens up the Fujinon XF
18-120mm f/4 LM PZ WR. 460g, and excellent sharpness.

For Fuji, we can also consider giving up on weight. A nice
kit consists of Sigma Contemporary 10-18mm 2.8 DC DN (260g),
Sigma Contemporary 18-50mm 2.8 DC DN (290g) and the Fujinon
XF 50-140mm 2.8 R LM OIS WR (995g). With bag and spare
battery we'd be at 2.5kg, but at excellent quality.

If that's too heavy, the Fujinon XC 50-230mm 4.5-6.7 OIS II
is cheap and comes at 375g. If we skip the range between 50
and 55 mm, the stabilized Fujinon XF 55-200mm 3.5-4.8 R LM
OIS (580g) would probably be the better choice. Sharpness on
the long side seems to suffer though.

I think, I would opt for either the compromised long end or
the overweight Sigma/Fuji combo. Lots of options in Fuji's
APS-only land.

DxO Pure RAW supports the X-H2, but they seemingly don't
support the lenses. This is not a matter of in-body software
correction. The OM-1 has software correction, but DxO often
produces better results. By the way, we have the same
situation with Sigma on Sony. DxO just does not support the
lenses.

## Sony

On the wide end, the Sony E 10-20mm F/4 PZ G seems to be the
way to go, especially at 178g :grin:

The Sony E 18-135mm 3.5-5.6 OSS is also widely recommended,
and it comes at 325g.

If we go for a three-lens setup, there is the Sony E 16-55mm
2.8 G with 494g and excellent reviews. Let's combine it with
... what?

There's the Tamron 35-150mm 2.0-2.8 Di III VXD, but at
1.17kg, it's out. Just out. So is the Samyang AF 35-150mm
2.0-2.8 FE, weighing 1.22kg :grin:

The Tamron 28-200mm 2.8-5.6 Di III RXD comes at 575g.
Reviews are raving, and we will also have to consider it for
"full-frame". For APS-C, I can imagine pairing it with
nothing but the Sony E 10-20mm F/4 PZ G. It leaves out the
range of 35-42 mm eq, but I suppose I could live with that.

What about Sony bodies for APS-C?

The Sony a6700 has an underwhelming viewfinder,
stabilization is not up to par with Olympus, but the at 493g
(batteries included), you can build the so far lightest kit
with Sony E 10-20mm F/4 PZ G and Sony E 18-135mm 3.5-5.6
OSS. Two lenses and a camera, covering the desired range,
altogether at 996g. Amazing.

Accepting the gap, combining the Sony E 10-20mm F/4 PZ G and
the Tamron 28-200mm 2.8-5.6 Di III RXD, I'd have more
range at still less weight than with my Olympus kit.

What about Sony "full-frame"? The Tamron 28-200mm 2.8-5.6 Di
III RXD is the widely praised travel zoom. Now let's get
something below.

The Sony FE 12-24mm 2.8 GM is ghastly expensive and at 847g
pretty heavy. Together with the Tamron, we'll be overweight.
1422g without a body. The Sony Alpha 7R V comes at 723g
(batteries included). 2145g, that's about 2.5kg with bag and
second battery.

The Sigma Art 14-24mm 2.8 DG DN brings us down only 50g, at
half the price. It's still expensive but reasonable. Still a
gap of 4 mm, still too heavy.

The Sigma Contemporary 16-28mm 2.8 DG DN is a nice match for
the Tamron 28-200mm 2.8-5.6 Di III RXD, and it weighs only
450g. 1748g, with bag and spare battery we are still not
where we want to be, but very, very close. 16mm is ... well,
we could have gone Canon APS-C as well for that.

## Nikon "full-frame"?

The Nikon Z 14-30mm 4.0 S is fine at 485g. I'd have wanted
something like that for Sony "full-frame", instead of the
800g monsters.

The only travel zoom for Nikon is the Nikon Z 24-200mm
4.0-6.3 VR. 570g, overall good reviews. 

So far, we have 1055g for two lenses. Let's search for a
body.

The Nikon Z9 is at 1.34 kg. It's not a travel camera. One
step down we have the Z8, 910g. Makes 1965g. Quite heavy.

The Z7II weighs in at 705g. I'd say that is ok, and so is
the upgrade to 45,7 megapixels.

The Z6III is up to 760g and down to 24.5 megapixels. It has
a better viewfinder, but the Z7III will likely get that as
well. I suppose it's due this year.

The two Nikon lenses and the Z7III would be, what I'd wait
for. I wouldn't buy the 2.8 zooms, none of them, but I can
imagine a few primes coming my way.

## Canon "full-frame"

The wide is a Canon RF 14-35mm 4.0 L IS USM (540g). No doubt.

The travel zoom would be the Canon RF 24-240mm 4.0-6.3 IS
USM, weighing in at 750g. It seems to be "good for a
superzoom". To me, the impression is, it's slightly below
the Nikon. I may be wrong though.

1290g so far. What about a body?

Similar situation as with Nikon (who wonders?). The R5C has
45 megapixels and 770g. That's the video version. Without a
fan, the R5 has only 738g. The R6II has 24 megapixels and
670g. I'd opt for the R5. This is slightly too heavy (maybe
2.3kg with spare battery and bag), but I might accept it.

## Leica L mount

Starts good with the Panasonic Lumix S 14-28mm 4.0-5.6 Makro
at 345g. Reviews are good, let's try to pair it.

The Panasonic Lumix S 20-60mm 3.5-5.6 at 350g and the
Panasonic Lumix S 70-300mm 4.5-5.6 Macro OIS at 790g are
quite interesting. The 20-60 has excellent reviews, the
70-300 still very good. Together, we talk about 500g left
for the body. This won't work out.

Let's have a look at the Panasonic Lumix S 28-200mm 4.0-7.1
Makro OIS. We'll cover the whole range, and it only brings
413g to the table. Bag, I mean. Is it good? Apart from the
7.1 at the long side, yes, at least not outrightt bad. At
200mm you seem to have to stop down to f8 or even f11, but
that's what OIS and in-body stabilization are for, right?

345g for the 14-28, 413g for the 28-200. That makes for
760g. 1 kg to spare for a body. Heck, I wouldn't combine it
with those lenses, but at 770g, even the Leica SL3 would be
an option :grin:

Everything above 24 megapixels is a Leica and out of range
in terms of cost. The Panasonic S9 lacks a viewfinder.
Nope.

The Panasonic Lumix DC-S5II has a more expensive video
cousin, but I don't need that. The S5II still has better
video than most cameras :grin:

24 megapixels, 740g. That's 1.5kg overall. Not the highest
resolution, not the best combo at the long end, not as light
as Sony APS-C, but not bad at all.

And you can mount super-expensive Leica primes
:stuck_out_tongue_closed_eyes:

## Conclusion

Some systems I've considered, have quite good options. Fuji,
Sony APS-C, Nikon Z and Leica L are the best, none is
compelling though.

At the moment, I'll keep my Olympus gear. I really have no
need in terms of anything. If OM-Systems closes shop, I'll
certainly be able to get a backup OM-1 or OM-1ii, as well as
another Olympus 12-100/4, if I need one. That might get me
along another five years. In the meantime, anything can
happen. Even OM-Systems might have a new, higher resolution
camera.

